---
title: 'Reality, It So Happens, Is Real'
date: 2014-01-17
tags:
---
Twenty years ago today, January 17, ‘94, at 4:31 a.m., I was awakened not by seismic waves springing out of the North-Central Valley, but by my girlfriend who, having lodged herself in the doorframe where she pressed outward with both hands in a near-gesture of benediction, was shouting at me to get out of bed. I think at the time she would have considered herself skeptical of Providence, but there’s nothing like the threat of natural apocalypse to turn us into Pascal’s suckers. She was right, though. The Northridge quake took a toll.

I could hear E.J., our roommate and the bass player in our band, shuffling about the living room and talking to Andrea about the CDs and books carpeting the floor. Gauging from their conversation that there would be some tedious picking up, I thought I might avoid it entirely if I could make Andrea feel ridiculous about her dread. I might cut an easy path through the inconvenience of the mess, which, as it turned out, was considerable.

A man. A plan. A canal.

A display of indifferent nonchalance would yield an additional benefit of becoming a demonstration of late-20th-century, alpha-male bravado. As though Nature’s worst were merely an exasperating inconvenience to be endured by me, He-Who-Could-Not-Be-Bothered. Be dashed, World of Mysteries.

I painted it thick, annoyed with her for having gotten me up. Plainly the earthquake was evidence of some failing on her part. She saw through the ploy, I’m sure, but no matter. My case played to what she wanted to believe, that there was nothing to worry about. And I’d’ve slept through through it all had it not been for her. So she’d have to work a little to bring me into a better humor. The healthy bond between us. In my defense, I’ve never been a morning person.

Our neighbors were up and more than a few West L.A. residents were milling about on Bundy Drive, by day a busy thoroughfare perhaps best known as the street where Nicole Brown and Ron Goldman would be found murdered on June 13 later that year, a crime for which O.J. Simpson would surrender himself exactly five months to the day after the earthquake. We were a few blocks south of O.J., so our paths, alas, never crossed that tremorous morning (nor ever). We did run into just about everyone else on our own block, people who had managed to remain mostly invisible to each other until then. The early hour was dark and chilly, as I recall, and many residents were wearing robes or other sleepwear, a sartorial situation which was in its own way a little unsettling. Emergency intimacy. Ho-hum, but noticeable. E.J. and I explored the profoundly limited novelty of loitering on Bundy in the dark with a small herd of drowsy Westies. The managers wanted us out of the building so that they could make sure, I suppose, that it wouldn’t all come crashing down. Andrea talked to complete strangers about Horrors Tectonic, sundry and various. I was sleepy and cold, so I flouted the ill-logic of freezing in the open, crept into the underground garage, and hid in my car where I dozed for a few minutes before Andrea came knocking on the window, reporting that we could go back in.

The quake was a harbinger. Later that year, a T.V. anchor would say of O.J.’s White Bronco flight, “This is one of those cases where you just can’t believe that reality is real.” Had I been more present in the moment of that morning on January 17, I would have been inclined to project the circumstances of natural upheaval as a sign of things to come. That tendency is certainly in keeping with my usual take on the universe, and I would feel that inclination more than once during that year, as I broke up with Andrea by pursuing another relationship, watched a four-year project dissolve, struggled to find a new way to define my future, and felt repeatedly the stings of loss and the urgency of new possibilities. There would be no easy paths cut through the unnatural, but not atypical, temblors of my own making.

Had I been more awake to the implications of the earthquake, I might, too, have been a little easier to be around that morning. I could have recognized that somewhere in my city, some were suffering. Looking back it seems that I had an investment in not always believing that reality was real, and it’s taken some considerable part of the last twenty years to get to a place where that investment has dwindled. Earthquakes, Providence’s or otherwise, break things down and some of those things stay broken. I don’t regret all of those losses. I do, at times, regret not knowing when and to what extent I was losing.
